README.md, before:

# DS9 — Let's Build an LLM

A ground-up LLM build: character-level transformer trained on DS9 scripts to understand attention and sequence modeling from first principles.

![Deep Space Nine](ds9-wallpaper.jpg)

---

## What is this?

In 2017, a team at Google published "Attention Is All You Need." The transformer was born. And it changed everything.

This series builds a character-level language model from scratch, trained on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine scripts, that generates new scenes. By the end, you'll understand how transformers actually work — not from reading about them, but from building one.

---

## What you'll build

A single file — `ds9_transformer.py` — that:

1. Downloads DS9 scripts automatically
2. Trains a small decoder-only transformer
3. Generates new scenes in the style of Deep Space Nine

---

## Syllabus

- Chapter 01: Introduction (What we're building and why it matters)
- Chapter 02: What Is a Language Model? (A guessing machine — tokens, numbers, predictions)
- Chapter 03: Getting the Data (Scraping DS9 scripts and preparing them for training)
- Chapter 04: The Bigram Model (The simplest possible guesser — one character at a time)
- Chapter 05: Why Bigrams Fail (What happens when context matters and we have none)
- Chapter 06: Self-Attention from Scratch (Teaching the model to look back at what it's already seen)
- Chapter 07: Multi-Head Attention (Looking at the same sequence from multiple angles at once)
- Chapter 08: The Transformer Block (Wiring attention, normalization, and feed-forward into one unit)
- Chapter 09: Stacking + Positional Encoding (Going deeper, and giving the model a sense of order)
- Chapter 10: Training for Real (Loss, gradients, AdamW, and when to stop)
- Chapter 11: Generating Text (Sampling from the model — temperature, randomness, control)
- Chapter 12: Reading the Output (What did it actually learn? Interpreting generated DS9 scenes)
- Chapter 13: Tokenization Done Right (Why characters aren't enough — intro to byte pair encoding)
- Chapter 14: Fine-Tuning (Adapting a trained model with less data and fewer resources)
- Chapter 15: RLHF (Teaching the model what "good output" means using feedback)

---

## Getting started

```bash
git clone https://github.com/louiscollinsjr/ds9-llm-from-zero.git
cd ds9-llm-from-zero
pip install torch requests
python ds9_transformer.py
```

The script downloads the data automatically. No setup beyond Python and PyTorch.

**Recommended hardware:** M1 Mac or any GPU. CPU works too — training is just slower.  
**No GPU?** Use [Kaggle Notebooks](https://www.kaggle.com/code) — free T4 GPU, no setup required.

---

## Following along

This project is being built live, section by section, published on LinkedIn and GitHub.

Each section is written to stand alone — you can read them in order or jump to whatever interests you. The full series is designed for two audiences: people with no AI background, and technical folks who want to see the internals clearly.

---

## Philosophy

This project builds on foundational work — from the researchers who introduced the transformer architecture, to educators like Andrej Karpathy, and the writers of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine whose scripts make the dataset possible.

We start with counting character pairs and work our way up to a full transformer, including fine-tuning. The goal is understanding through construction — learning the mechanics by implementing them.

If you’ve read about transformers but want to truly understand how they work under the hood, this repository is for you.

---

## License

MIT

Commit message:

docs: convert syllabus to checklist format with chapter links and completion tracking

README.md, after:

# DS9 — Let's Build an LLM

A ground-up LLM build: character-level transformer trained on DS9 scripts to understand attention and sequence modeling from first principles.

![Deep Space Nine](ds9-wallpaper.jpg)

---

## What is this?

In 2017, a team at Google published "Attention Is All You Need." The transformer was born. And it changed everything.

This series builds a character-level language model from scratch, trained on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine scripts, that generates new scenes. By the end, you'll understand how transformers actually work — not from reading about them, but from building one.

---

## What you'll build

A single file — `ds9_transformer.py` — that:

1. Downloads DS9 scripts automatically
2. Trains a small decoder-only transformer
3. Generates new scenes in the style of Deep Space Nine

---

## Syllabus

Each chapter has its own markdown in `docs/chapters/`. Checklist shows completion status.

- [x] Preface: [Introduction](docs/chapters/preface-introduction.md) (What we're building and why it matters)
- [x] [Chapter 01: What Is a Language Model?](docs/chapters/chapter-01-what-is-a-language-model.md) (A guessing machine — tokens, numbers, predictions)
- [ ] [Chapter 02: Getting the Data](docs/chapters/chapter-02-getting-the-data.md) (Scraping DS9 scripts and preparing them for training)
- [ ] [Chapter 03: The Bigram Model](docs/chapters/chapter-03-the-bigram-model.md) (The simplest possible guesser — one character at a time)
- [ ] [Chapter 04: Why Bigrams Fail](docs/chapters/chapter-04-why-bigrams-fail.md) (What happens when context matters and we have none)
- [ ] [Chapter 05: Self-Attention from Scratch](docs/chapters/chapter-05-self-attention-from-scratch.md) (Teaching the model to look back at what it's already seen)
- [ ] [Chapter 06: Multi-Head Attention](docs/chapters/chapter-06-multi-head-attention.md) (Looking at the same sequence from multiple angles at once)
- [ ] [Chapter 07: The Transformer Block](docs/chapters/chapter-07-transformer-block.md) (Wiring attention, normalization, and feed-forward into one unit)
- [ ] [Chapter 08: Stacking + Positional Encoding](docs/chapters/chapter-08-stacking-and-positional-encoding.md) (Going deeper, and giving the model a sense of order)
- [ ] [Chapter 09: Training for Real](docs/chapters/chapter-09-training-for-real.md) (Loss, gradients, AdamW, and when to stop)
- [ ] [Chapter 10: Generating Text](docs/chapters/chapter-10-generating-text.md) (Sampling from the model — temperature, randomness, control)
- [ ] [Chapter 11: Reading the Output](docs/chapters/chapter-11-reading-the-output.md) (What did it actually learn? Interpreting generated DS9 scenes)
- [ ] [Chapter 12: Tokenization Done Right](docs/chapters/chapter-12-tokenization-done-right.md) (Why characters aren't enough — intro to byte pair encoding)
- [ ] [Chapter 13: Fine-Tuning](docs/chapters/chapter-13-fine-tuning.md) (Adapting a trained model with less data and fewer resources)
- [ ] [Chapter 14: RLHF](docs/chapters/chapter-14-rlhf.md) (Teaching the model what "good output" means using feedback)

---

## Getting started

```bash
git clone https://github.com/louiscollinsjr/ds9-llm-from-zero.git
cd ds9-llm-from-zero
pip install torch requests
python ds9_transformer.py
```

The script downloads the data automatically. No setup beyond Python and PyTorch.

**Recommended hardware:** M1 Mac or any GPU. CPU works too — training is just slower.  
**No GPU?** Use [Kaggle Notebooks](https://www.kaggle.com/code) — free T4 GPU, no setup required.

---

## Following along

This project is being built live, section by section, published on LinkedIn and GitHub.

Each section is written to stand alone — you can read them in order or jump to whatever interests you. The full series is designed for two audiences: people with no AI background, and technical folks who want to see the internals clearly.

---

## Philosophy

This project builds on foundational work — from the researchers who introduced the transformer architecture, to educators like Andrej Karpathy, and the writers of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine whose scripts make the dataset possible.

We start with counting character pairs and work our way up to a full transformer, including fine-tuning. The goal is understanding through construction — learning the mechanics by implementing them.

If you’ve read about transformers but want to truly understand how they work under the hood, this repository is for you.

---

## License

MIT
